NEWS for EDB, the Emacs Database

Copyright (C) 2004-2017 Thien-Thi Nguyen
See the end for copying conditions.


- 1.33 | 2017-06-17

  - Installation change: ‘database.el[c]’ in ‘${sitelisp}’

    Previously, "make install" created, and copied all *.el[c] to,
    directory ‘${sitelisp}/edb/’ with the expectation that there
    exist file ‘${sitelisp}/subdirs.el’ (or equivalent) to add
    ‘${sitelisp}/edb’ to ‘load-path’.

    Now, "make install" copies ‘database.el[c]’ to ‘${sitelisp}/’
    (and the rest to ‘${sitelisp}/edb/’, as previously).  On load,
    ‘database.el[c]’ adds ‘${sitelisp}/edb’ to ‘load-path’.

    Furthermore, "make install" touches ‘${sitelisp}/edb/.nosearch’
    to inhibit the (possibly pre-existing) subdirs.el from nosing
    about there.

    The overall result of this change is to make casual installation
    under non-standard ‘${sitelisp}’ more likely to work out of the
    box.  It's enough to have ‘${sitelisp}’ already in ‘load-path’:

     $ ./configure --prefix /tmp/ignore --with-sitelisp=/tmp/eval
     $ make all check install installcheck
     $ emacs -q -Q -L /tmp/eval --eval "(require 'database)"
     $ make uninstall      # or reboot to clear /tmp  :-P

    That's it!  Hopefully, this encourages play and feedback.

    Another benefit of this approach is one less directory in
    ‘load-path’ (be nice to old/slow computers and their users) for
    sessions that do not require EDB.  Presume less, resume more!

  - Documentation changes

    - New chapter: Convenience libraries

      The EDB manual now includes (info "(edb) Convenience libraries")
      to document ‘edb-t-human-names.el’ and ‘edb-t-places-usuk.el’
      data structures and functions.

    - Manual declared UTF-8, more spacious

      This basically means the Info format output now sports nice
      single quotation marks: not `this', not 'this', but ‘THIS’.

      Also, there are more blank lines between non-trivial table items
      (see <http://www.gnuvola.org/u/2017/05/17h22.html> for details).

  - SKRAM changes

    - Accountability via prefixed ‘message’

      In ‘skram/’, the Emacs Lisp ‘bfuncs’ (and new file ‘bfuncs-edb’)
      functions use a prefixed ‘message’ to let you know who is doing
      what.  This is (marginally :-D) more interesting than before.

    - New database: ‘examples-syms.edb’

      After configuration and "make", you can try:

       $ cd skram
       $ make examples-syms.data

      and play with ‘examples-syms.edb’ there.  This database contains
      EDB API elements used by ‘*.{edb,dba}’ files under ‘examples/’.
      This process also demonstrates programmatic report generation
      (file ‘skram/skram.report’).

    - More "ok"

      Thanks to the new chapter in the manual (see above), the number
      of skram.data entries with ‘thumbs-one’ value "ok" has increased
      from 121 (20.4%) to 151 (25.5%) -- woo hoo!

  - Tools used for bootstrap/maintenance

    upgraded:

     GNU gnulib 2017-05-28 11:51:08

    as before:

     GNU Autoconf 2.69
     GNU Automake 1.15
     GNU texinfo 6.3


- 1.32 | 2016-12-24

  - Changes in distribution / build

    - New tarball format: .tar.lz

      (This is in addition to the .tar.gz file.)

      If you have GNU tar, you can use "tar xf" and it will DTRT.
      If not, you can use "lzip -dc TARBALL | tar xf -" to unpack
      the .tar.lz, or "gzip -dc TARBALL | tar xf -" for the .tar.gz.

    - New support for ‘DESTDIR’

      Both "make install" and "make installcheck" are now sensitive to
      ‘DESTDIR’.  This is to support distro packaging.

    - New support for "make uninstall"

      Note that this is also sensitive to ‘DESTDIR’ (see above).

    - Portability tweaks

      EDB now cleanly builds and passes "make check" for those Emacs
      versions that have cl-lib and lexical binding, while retaining
      (we hope) full functionality for those w/o.  This release was
      lightly tested w/ GNU Emacs 23.4, 24.3, 24.4, 25.1 and a late
      2016 checkout from the Git repo.

      Here, "cleanly" means w/o errors and warnings -- automatically
      suppressed are the "cl package required at runtime" warning, and
      the "global/dynamic var `VAR' lacks a prefix" warning (for VAR ∈
      {database, ignored}).

      If you see any errors or warnings, that's a bug -- please report!

    - Spurious refcard.ps rebuild suppressed

      Previously, "make" would spuriously rebuild doc/refcard.ps, a
      potentially errorful situation if you don't have the right TeX
      tools installed.  Now, doc/refcard.ps rebuild on "make" only
      happens if doc/refcard.tex changes.

  - Changes in functionality

    - Bugfix: ‘db-copy-region-as-kill’

      Previously, ‘db-copy-region-as-kill’ (bound to ‘M-w’ in Database
      Edit mode) only called ‘interprogram-cut-function’ when the last
      command was ‘db-kill-region’ (bound to ‘C-w’ Database Edit mode).
      Now it does so in all cases.

  - Changes in documentation

    - New support for manual in Postscript and PDF

      In the doc/ subdir, you can do "make edb.ps" and "make edb.pdf"
      to build the manual in Postscript and PDF formats, respectively.

    - Paragraphs indented for non-Info formats

      Previously, the manual's paragraphs were never indented, for any
      output format.  Now, non-indentation is limited to Info format.

    - Documentation for edbibtex included

      Specifically, examples/edbibtex/edbibtex.info.

  - Tools used for bootstrap/maintenance

    upgraded:

     GNU gnulib 2016-10-22 17:17:26
     GNU Autoconf 2.69
     GNU Automake 1.15
     GNU texinfo 6.3

    as before:

     (none)


- 1.31 | 2008-05-26

  - Install fix: install edb.info, too!


- 1.30 | 2008-05-26

  - Build fix: "gmake all" now works under Windoze

    No pipes there, how peculiar (BUGS #15).

  - Bugfix: Deleting a record no longer signals ‘args-out-of-range’

    Previously, for non-inherent databases, 9% of the deletions
    (1/11) would result in a ‘args-out-of-range’ error, and possibly
    corrupt the database (BUGS #16).

  - Changes to Database Edit commands

    - ‘C-a’ twice goes to beginning of field
    - ‘C-e’ twice goes to end of field

      That is, on the first invocation, the commands behave normally,
      going to beginning or end of line, respectively.  A successive
      invocation goes "further".  This is useful for multi-line
      fields, since ‘M-<’ and ‘M->’ are by default coopted for
      ‘db-first-record’ and ‘db-last-record’, respectively.

    - ‘C-k’ respects ‘kill-whole-line’

  - New handling for file-not-writable on interactive save

    On save, where ‘noninteractive’ is nil, if file is not writable,
    offer to make it writable and continue.  This uses ‘y-or-n-p’ to
    query and does a simple ‘set-file-modes’ (no vc integration).


- 1.29 | 2008-01-17

  - License now GPLv3+ (see COPYING)

  - Bugfix: Single-field records no longer trigger warning on read

    Previously, a database with only a single field per record would
    trigger some warning messages and eventually query the user:
    "Bad file format; try reading anyway?".  Answering "yes" would
    successfully read in the data (anyway).

    Now, such databases are read normally (w/o incident).

  - Bugfix: Pre- and post- regexp-specified cruft no longer discarded

    Previously, if a database's pre-first-regexp was specified, the
    text matching that regexp (on read) was discarded (on write).
    Likewise for post-last-regexp.  This text is now saved and later
    used on write.

    With this bugfix, BUGS.edb is finally able to both read and
    write the BUGS file (bug #1 resolved).  Good-bye ostrich dayz!

  - Emacs no longer asks about some hooks as file local variable

    Specifying ‘db-before-read-hooks’ and ‘db-after-read-hooks’ in a
    format file's Local Variables block makes some versions of Emacs
    ask about whether or not the value is "safe".  EDB now arranges
    for Emacs to consider values that satisfy ‘edb-hookp’ to be safe
    (thus avoiding this particular interruption).

  - Command edb-1int-to-single autoloaded

    This command -- see (info "(edb) edb-1int-to-single") --
    can now be invoked with M-x, once EDB is loaded.

  - Control files can specify a "schema basis"

    This is a variable that holds a plist of control properties,
    useful for sharing common properties among many databases.
    The values therein undergo elaboration just like normal
    control props prior to the normal control props.

    For example, in ~/.emacs:
    (defvar foo (list :fields [a b c]
                      :record-defaults 'foo-new-record-plist))

    In x.edb:
    :EDB (single foo)
    :name "x foo!"

    In y.edb:
    :EDB (single foo)
    :name "y foo!"

    In z.edb:
    :EDB (single foo)
    :name "z foo!"
    :record-defaults 'foo-z-new-record-plist ;; override

    See (info "(edb) Specifying control") for details.

  - Command extended: db-add-record can now append

    This command now accepts an optional arg APPEND.  If non-nil,
    add the new record after the last record in the database and
    display "Appended" instead of "Inserted".


- 1.28 | 2007-05-29

  - Bugfix: C-h m (describe-mode) no longer throws error

    Previously, ‘C-h m’ in either Database View or Database Edit
    mode would throw a "Symbol's function definition is void" error.
    This bug was introduced in EDB 1.26.

  - Bugfix: displayspec can handle multiple options

    Previously, the displayspec ‘\id,width=5,right-justify’ would
    render the field ‘id’ without any padding whatsoever.  This was
    due to a bug in ‘right-justify’ handling as well as a more
    general (regexp-related -- surprise, surprise) problem handling
    multiple options.  These are now fixed.

  - Dropped items announced in EDB 1.27 NEWS (see below)

    - Support for FOO-separator variables in edb-t-timedate1.el

    - Six functions

      (internal) database-recordfieldspec
      (internal) database-recordfieldspec-type
      (internal) database-set-recordfieldspec
      (spurious) db-tagged-rrfr-hooks
      (spurious) db-tagged-wrfr-before-hooks
      (spurious) db-tagged-wrfr-after-hooks

  - Control file can start w/ comments and blank lines

    The text ":EDB " used to be expected at the very beginning of
    the buffer; now, any preceding comment and blank lines are
    skipped w/o error.  See examples/null.edb for an example.

  - New Database Summary mode keybinding: ‘S’ now runs ‘db-sort’

  - New documentation: refcard

    Erich Wälde contributed refcard.tex (source for refcard.ps),
    in the doc/ subdir.

  - New command: edb-interact

    Actually, this is just ‘edb-EXPERIMENTAL-interact’ renamed; the
    old name is a now an alias, to be removed for EDB 1.29.

  - Maintenance uses GNU Autoconf 2.60


- 1.27 | 2006-07-13

  - Configuration bugfix: Emacs executable specification made consistent

    Configuration and build have different methods for specifying
    the Emacs executable -- these used to be not easily overridden.
    Now you can override them in both contexts similarly, by
    specifying the environment variable ‘EMACS’.  See README.

  - Installation bugfix: Remember to install all relevant files!

    Some files (db-lemacs.el, db-nosetf.el and db-oldnames.el)
    are now installed (and not just distributed).  This error was
    due to a regression in the makefile introduced in EDB 1.26.

  - Bugfix: Substitutions use literal text for replacement

    Some i/o operations temporarily replace difficult-to-manage text
    (like backslashes) w/ an easier-to-manage string.  These used to
    use ‘replace-match’ without specifying that the replacement be
    literal, which caused an "Invalid use of ‘\\’ in replacement
    text" error in some cases.  These have been fixed.

  - Bugfixes for edb-t-timedate.el

    - ‘edb-t-timedate1:format-date’ renders "%yy" correctly

      This used to render years as modulo 1900, resulting in more than
      two characters, for year 2000 and later.  For example:

      (defun (demo Y M D)
        (let ((date (edb-t-timedate1:make-date Y M D)))
          (edb-t-timedate1:format-date "%yy" date)))

      before: (demo 2006 5 31) => "106"
         now: (demo 2006 5 31) => "06"

    - Specialized formatting functions use format consistent w/ name

      Certain functions edb-t-timedate1:format-date-FOO used to use
      formatting codes inconsistent w/ their names.  Here is a table
      showing the change and an example for each FOO, using SPC as a
      separator between components (actual default separators vary):

      FOO       before (example)        now (example)
      ddmmyy    %d %m %yy "3 5 06"      %dd %mm %yy "03 05 06"
      ddmmmyy   %d %mon %yy "3 May 06"  %dd %mon %yy "03 May 06"
      yyyymmdd  %year %m %d "2006 5 3"  %year %mm %dd "2006 05 03"

  - Bugfix: Last record no longer ignored for "inherent data"

    For controls with inherent data (specified with the ‘:data’
    control property), EDB used to silently ignore the last record
    (off-by-one error in the implementation).  Now, all records are
    read properly.  Also, the order of the records in memory is now
    maintained to be the same as the order in the control.

  - Bugfix: Emacs no longer queries about "safe" local variables

    Previously, ‘edb-EXPERIMENTAL-interact’ used to cause Emacs 22
    to query about whether or not certain file-local variables are
    "safe".  Now, these internal details are properly hidden.

  - Bugfix: Database w/ inherent data can coexist w/ other databases

    Previously, a control file w/ inherent data could not be read in
    the presence of other databases due to a bug in the accounting
    internals; EDB would throw an error (wrong-type-arg: stringp).
    Now, these databases can coexist w/o this particular problem.

    For example:
    (require 'database)
    (dired "examples")
    (edb-EXPERIMENTAL-interact "arb-demo.edb" "arb-demo")
    (edb-EXPERIMENTAL-interact "forms-demo2-inherent.edb" nil)

  - Emacs 21.x compatibility fixes

    - No longer use three args with ‘defalias’

    - Define ‘insert-buffer-substring-no-properties’ if necessary

  - Dropped items

    - Command: db-convert

      This was once documented in the info page as "rudimentary", but
      was otherwise unreferenced and unused both in EDB and elsewhere.
      Similar functionality may return in the future, after some of
      EDB 1.x's (excessive) dynamicism is properly reigned in.

    - Macro: deflocalvar
    - Function: define-displaytype-from-optstring
    - Function: define-one-char-enum-displaytype
    - Function: define-type-alias

      These were either unused, unimplemented (and throwing error if
      called), or made obsolete by internal changes.

    - Coordination with crypt++.el

      EDB no longer calls ‘crypt-insert-file-contents’ from external
      package crypt++.el (if loaded).  Instead, you can enable Auto
      Compression mode, which is included with Emacs.

    - Items listed in advance notice from EDB 1.26 NEWS (see below)

  - Backward-incompatible change: format of :locals control more concise

    Previously, the :locals vector elements could be either a symbol
    or a pair (SYMBOL . INIT-VAL).  Now, the format for the latter
    variant is (SYMBOL INIT-FORM).  Also, INIT-FORM is now evaluated
    so you don't need to do that yourself.  For example:

    before:  :locals `[foo (ht . ,(make-hash-table)) bar]
    now:     :locals  [foo (ht (make-hash-table)) bar]

    In other words, the syntax resembles that of a ‘let’ bindings
    block with square braces instead of parentheses on the outside.

  - Example databases writable

    The sooner you play with EDB (once it is built and loaded), the
    sooner you can report any bugs you find.  (Thanks!)

  - Mode lines say "Database" as part of the mode name

    before:
    -***-Database: machine-dbase   (Edit Abbrev 42/431)---All-

    now:
    -***- machine-dbase   (Database Edit Abbrev 42/431)---All-

    This is more informative (and looks nicer) in buffer listings.

  - Changes to edb-t-timedate.el

    - Some date formatting funcs now take optional arg SEPARATOR

      These funcs (w/ default separator):
        edb-t-timedate1:format-date-mmddyy   "/"
        edb-t-timedate1:format-date-yymmdd   "" (empty string)
        edb-t-timedate1:format-date-ddmmyy   "."
        edb-t-timedate1:format-date-ddmmmyy  " " (space)
        edb-t-timedate1:format-date-yyyymmdd "/"

      now take an optional second arg SEPARATOR which can be used to
      override the default listed above.  There is presently support
      for the (previously, and probably always to be, undocumented)
      vars named by appending "-separator" to the functions' names,
      but that support will be dropped for EDB 1.28.

      To convert code that uses the obsoleted vars, find fragments:
        (let ((FF-separator "*")) (FF date))

      and change them to look like:
        (FF date "*")

    - New formatting func: edb-t-timedate1:format-date-iso
    - New builtin displaytype: date-iso

      For example:
      (edb-t-timedate1:format-date-iso
       (edb-t-timedate1:make-date 2006 7 3))
      => "2006-07-03"

      See examples/eicsw.edb for an example usage.

  - New func: db-set-field-help
  - New support for field-specific help in ‘db-field-help’

    You can now specify a field's help info (string or form that
    produces a string when evaluated) separately from that of the
    field's record type; it is no longer necessary to merge the help
    information in the record type.  Field-specific help is displayed
    first, followed by two newlines, followed by the record type's
    help.

  - New attribute :index-function for tagged file layout setup

    You can now specify ‘:index-function FUNC’ as an attribute
    override for tagged file layout setup.  FUNC is called with one
    arg, the database object.  Relatedly, the manual now documents
    the restriction on using ‘db-after-read-hooks’ (you can use
    :index-function, instead).

  - New support for writing data in a control with inherent data

    See (info "(./edb.info) Control properties reference")
    specifically entry ‘:data TEXT-BLOCK-SPEC’.  See also
    examples/forms-demo2-inherent.edb (a control file).

  - New configure option: --disable-badnames (see README)

  - New command: edb-1int-to-single

    This command helps you to migrate away from "internal file
    layout", support for which will be dropped in EDB 2.x, by
    translating that file into a functionally equivalent (more or
    less) "control with inherent data".  See info node by the same
    name in the EDB manual.

  - New command: edb-meta

    This command summarizes EDB state in a new buffer.  Since it
    exposes some internals, it is useful for debugging EDB and/or
    client programs, but probably not suited for casual users.  To
    try it out in place, build EDB and evaluate the forms:

      (load-file "lisp/edb-meta.elc")
      (edb-meta)

    Once installed, ‘edb-meta’ can be invoked automatically after
    EDB is loaded (i.e., it is autoloaded).

  - Advance notice for to-be-dropped items in EDB 1.28

    (internal) database-recordfieldspec
    (internal) database-recordfieldspec-type
    (internal) database-set-recordfieldspec
    (spurious) db-tagged-rrfr-hooks
    (spurious) db-tagged-wrfr-before-hooks
    (spurious) db-tagged-wrfr-after-hooks

    Actually "spurious" is kind of a pun: Similar facilities exist
    for customizing the reading/writing of tagged-format data, when
    you use control properties, so you SHOULD use them (ha ha).
    See examples/{eicsw,geneal}.edb.

  - Maintenance uses files from GNU Automake 1.9.6


- 1.26 | 2005-12-31

  - Bugfixes

    - In View mode, ‘M-TAB’ no longer says "I was confused"

      This key runs either ‘db-last-field’ or ‘db-previous-field’,
      depending on whether or Edit minor mode is in effect.  EDB used
      to spuriously display "I was confused" in the echo area, which
      was probably strictly correct (since it was indeed confused
      about its state of confusion), but not correct from a user POV,
      since behavior was as expected in all other respects (point
      would move to the right place anyway).

    - In Summary mode, ‘o’ runs command ‘db-output-record-to-db’

      It used to be bound to a non-existent command.  Also,
      ‘db-output-record-to-db’ now works from the summary buffer.

    - Emacs Lisp mode hooks disabled for "Internal Format" read

      Reading data files in this format uses Emacs Lisp mode, by
      calling ‘emacs-lisp-mode’, which at some point runs the normal
      hook ‘emacs-lisp-mode-hook’.  This value is now arranged to be
      nil for the duration of the read, to avoid potential problems.

    - Local Variables block no longer limited

      EDB looks on the last page (area beginning with form-feed, ^L)
      of the format buffer for the Local Variables block.  It used to
      expect the last page within 3000 characters of point-max.  Now,
      EDB searches the entire buffer (from the end) for the ^L, using
      point-min if that char is not found.

  - Dropped buffer-local variable: dbf-hidden-to-end-p

    Setting/toggling of this sort option is still possible through
    the interactive (sort) interface.  The setting can no longer be
    saved from one session to the next.

  - Dropped hook: db-load-hooks

    To continue to use ‘db-load-hooks’, you must arrange to run the
    functions in ‘db-load-hooks’ yourself, with the form:

    (eval-after-load "database" '(run-hooks 'db-load-hooks))

    Note that the ‘run-hooks’ form is quoted.

  - Better support for read-record-from-region function

    - Point pre-set to beginning of accessible region

      This basically means that read-record-from-region functions no
      longer need to begin with ‘(goto-char (point-min))’.

    - Return value may be a plist or an alist

      Previously, read-record-from-region functions had to return a
      record object, thus requiring allocation and population of a new
      record using funcs ‘make-record’ and ‘record-set-field’.

      While this is still supported (for EDB 1.x), these functions can
      now opt to return either a property list, with alternating field
      names and values; or a form ‘(:alist ALIST)’, where ALIST is an
      association list.  In such cases, EDB handles the allocation and
      population of the record.  Also, new function ‘db-make-record’
      combines functionality of ‘make-record’ and ‘record-set-field’.
      For example:

      ;; Returning a record the bad old way:
      (defun my-rrfr ()
        (let ((record (make-record database)))
          (record-set-field record 'coolsw "SWIG" database)
          (record-set-field record 'guilty "D.Beazley" database)
          record))

      ;; Returning a record the not-so-bad new way:
      (defun my-rrfr ()
        (db-make-record database 'coolsw "SWIG" 'guilty "D.Beazley"))

      ;; Returning a plist:
      (defun my-rrfr ()
        (list 'coolsw "SWIG" 'guilty "D.Beazley"))

      ;; Returning an alist:
      (defun my-rrfr ()
        (cons :alist (list (cons 'coolsw "SWIG")
                           (cons 'guilty "D.Beazley"))))

      Note that these examples do not actually parse the region.

  - Changes to the sort interface

    - All fields visible

      There is no longer a separate "killed field" stack.  Instead,
      when you type ‘C-k’ on a field, it is moved to the top of the
      list of nonsignificant fields (whether or not it was itself
      significant to begin with).  Reciprocally, typing ‘C-y’ moves
      the field at the top of the list of nonsignificant fields to the
      location under point.  ‘C-u C-y’ does the same, but repositions
      point to be in front of the just-inserted field.  ‘C-y’ can only
      be invoked within the list of significant fields.

      In this way, all fields are always visible.

    - You can "drag" a field

      The default bindings of ‘M-n’ and ‘M-p’ are now to a pair of
      keyboard macros that essentially arrange to move the field
      under point "down" and "up", respectively.  These make use of
      ‘C-k’ and ‘C-y’ and inherit their behaviors and restrictions;
      in particular, dragging works for significant fields only.
      (Ordering of non-significant fields does not make sense --
      that's why they are non-significant!)

  - Changes to View mode

    - ‘+’ runs command ‘db-additional-data-display-buffer’

    - ‘x’ runs command ‘db-kill-buffer’
    - ‘X’ runs command ‘db-kill-all-buffers’

      These give a more consistent feel than with ‘db-exit’, which is
      still available for backwards compatability but not bound in any
      keymap.  Primarily, you no longer need to type ‘C-u x’ to
      actually kill the buffer.  Be careful: A prefix arg now means
      "force", which discards unsaved changes no questions asked.

  - "Internal Format" version now 0.7

    Note, however, that "internal format" is really a misfeature --
    originally this performance hack was worth the maintenance
    trouble (always associated with exposing internals), but that
    point was passed about ten years ago.

  - New functions for managing mark and hide bits

    The function ‘edb-tag’ returns a database's "tag object" given a
    name (which, for EDB 1.x, can be ‘:markedp’ or ‘:hiddenp’).  The
    tag object can be passed to ‘edb-tagp’, ‘edb-tagx’ or ‘edb-tag-’
    along with a record to be checked for the tag, set with the tag,
    or cleared of the tag, respectively.

    This particular interface (four functions, presently) is upward
    compatible with EDB 2.x.  See node "Setting the mark and hide
    bits" in the EDB manual for more info.

    This change is concomitant with the removal, as described in the
    EDB 1.25 manual, of the "link abstraction", where mark and hide
    bits lived previously.

  - Advance notice for to-be-dropped items in EDB 1.27

    (alias)     db-commit-record
    (internal)  dbc-set-hide-p
    (internal)  db-setup-data-display-buffer
    (redundant) dbf-reset-on-edit-list
    (alias)     make-record
    (alias)     record-field
    (alias)     record-set-field

  - FSF street address updated in copyright notices


- 1.25 | 2005-01-24

  - Bugfix: Edited databases can be saved

    A severe bug was introduced in EDB 1.24 whereby edited databases
    could not be saved.  The command ‘db-save-database’ would result
    in the error "Wrong type argument: arrayp, nil" on the first
    invocation.  A follow-on invocation was required to actually do
    the save.

  - Bugfix: Computed sort function handles (eq value1 value2)

    Previously, the somewhat-internal function ‘db-rs-sortfunc’
    would return a function that failed to implement "reversal"
    semantics in the cases where its args were ‘eq’.

  - Bugfix: Canoncalization of creation methods (db-convert.el)

    The function ‘db-canonicalize-creation-method’ now returns a
    well-formed creation-method object.

  - Default value for ‘db-inform-interval’ bumped to 100

  - In Database View and Summary modes, ‘t’ runs ‘toggle-truncate-lines’

  - Encoding for the data file can now be specified

    You can specify the encoding of the data file by adding to the
    Local Variables section in the format file a line of the form:

    edb-data-coding: CODING

    There is one restriction: If CODING is not one that Emacs can
    automatically recognize (e.g., ‘utf-16le’), and the data file is
    in "internal layout", then both format and data file must be in
    the same encoding, and you need to do ‘C-x <RET> c CODING <RET>’
    immediately prior to ‘M-x db-find-file’.  ‘C-x <RET> c’ normally
    runs the command ‘universal-coding-system-argument’.

    Unfortunately, this restriction is unlikely to be lifted due to
    limitations of the ‘db-find-file’ design that cannot be removed
    for continuing EDB 1.x compatibility.  On the other hand, it is
    not difficult to arrange for Emacs to automatically recognize
    file encoding.  For more info, see file BUGS, bug #5.

  - More namespace cleaning

    - db-nosetf.el and db-oldnames.el

      Cleaning for EDB 1.x function / variable namespace continues.
      To provide backward (polluting) compatability for applications
      built on early EDB 1.x, the distribution includes db-nosetf.el
      and db-oldnames.el.  EDB and the examples do not use these
      files; they will be dropped in EDB 2.x.  They can be loaded
      "manually", like so:

      (require 'database)       ;; Ideally this is sufficient,
      (require 'db-oldnames)    ;; ... but sometimes reality
      (require 'db-nosetf)      ;; ... is where we find ourselves.

      If you find yourself using a function or variable defined in
      db-oldnames.el, it's probably a good idea to replace it w/ the
      newer name so as to be able to avoid loading db-oldnames.el in
      the first place.  An alternative approach, recommended since
      db-oldnames.el is rather monolithic, is to grep out only the
      mappings you need into "my-edb-1-oldnames.el" and use that.

      FYI, the sk4 data file in subdir skram/ lists the interface
      elements disregarding db-oldnames.el and db-nosetf.el.  You can
      build it by doing "make sk4" in that directory.

    - new files: edb-t-GROUP.el

      Functions to support various "type groups" (for lack of a better
      term) have been moved to edb-t-GROUP.el, from db-time.el (which
      has been deleted) and db-types.el:

      GROUP                         FILE
      human names                   edb-t-human-names.el
      US/UK places                  edb-t-places-usuk.el
      EDB 1.x-compatible time/date  edb-t-timedate1.el (note the "1")

      These are all covered in db-oldnames.el, described immediately
      above, although it is probably better to load them yourself and
      use the new names if you need them.

      The naming convention is filename "edb-t-GROUP.el" and prefix
      (for function and variable names) "edb-t-GROUP:".

      This change fixes a name (and functionality) conflict between
      the defunct db-time.el function ‘parse-time-string’ and that
      provided by some newer versions of Emacs.  The naming convention
      for type groups should sidestep future problems in this vein.

  - Makefile supports "make edb.dvi" again (disabled EDB 1.22 through 1.24)

  - GNU make required to build/install EDB

    Some of the makefiles are now renamed GNUmakefile, and thus
    require GNU make (perhaps installed as "gmake" or similar) to
    build and install EDB.  This is primarily to support "VPATH
    builds" w/o resorting to Automake.

  - Tested against GNU Emacs 21.2 and GNU Emacs from cvs (2005-01-10)


- 1.24 | 2004-10-13

  - Bugfix: Type registries now less wasteful
  - Function extended: define-displaytype-from-displayspec
  - Function extended: define-recordfieldtype-from-recordfieldspec

    Every invocation of ‘define-displaytype-from-displayspec’ or
    ‘define-recordfieldtype-from-recordfieldspec’ used to push a new
    name/object pair onto the respective vars ‘db-displaytypes’ and
    ‘db-recordfieldtypes’, disregarding the presence of a previously
    existing pair with the same name.  The result was that old
    definitions could never be found again even though they still
    took up memory.  These functions and the vars they modify have
    now been changed to ensure that for any name (in each var), only
    one associated definition is maintained.

    Additionally, these functions have been extended in two ways:

    (1) Each takes an optional &rest arg OVERRIDE, as an alternative
    method for specifying attributes of the type.  Using OVERRIDE is
    recommended for upward compatability and conciseness.

    (2) The second arg SOURCE can also be the (symbolic) name of a
    previously defined displayspec or recordfieldspec, respectively;
    or nil.  Together with (1), you can effect modification by
    specifying the same name for NAME (first arg) and SOURCE, or you
    can effect inheritence otherwise.  EDB does not remember a child
    type's parent; later changes to a parent type do not propagate
    to its currently-existing children.

  - Keybinding changes in Database View mode

    ‘F’ now runs ‘dbf-set-summary-format’.
    ‘S’          ‘db-sort’.

  - Function extended: db-tagged-setup

    This func now takes additional arguments, ATTRS, which are
    alternating keywords and values specifying attributes of the
    "tagged database".  This method is an alternative to using
    ‘database-set-local’ (which is to migrate internally within a
    release or two), and recommended for upward compatability and
    conciseness.

  - New distributed file: PLANS

    This is kind of like TODO but w/o the commitment, and more
    vague and verbose (PLANS:TODO::courtship:marriage ;-).

  - New distributed file: BUGS

  - ANONCVS instructions updated


- 1.23 | 2004-08-29

  - Bugfix: Functions no longer switched via ‘fset’

    EDB used to fset ‘save-some-buffers’ to ‘db-save-some-buffers’,
    storing the original version away to call later.  Even though
    this was documented, this kind of behavior is now considered a
    misfeature at best.  EDB no longer does this.  The command
    ‘db-save-some-buffers’ is still available, but you have to
    invoke it as ‘M-x db-save-some-buffers’, or bind a key to it.

    Likewise, ‘insert’ was fset to ‘db-insert’, an EDB-internal func.

    [Gratuitous Comment: This one blew my mind when I discovered it.
    Perhaps all the hand-wringing about speed in the source code
    comments would not have been necessary had such a fundamental
    function not been toyed with so capriciously in the first place.
    Che palle!]

  - Bugfix: local variable ‘enable-multibyte-characters’ handled specially

    When writing the database to an external file format, one of
    the steps is to copy local variables from one buffer to another.
    Previously this did not call ‘set-buffer-multibyte’, resulting in
    a "trying to set constant" error.

  - Command dropped: edb-update

    Changes in distribution and build practice have rendered this
    command obsolete.

  - Variable deprecated: db-default-field-type
  - Function takes optional third arg: database-set-fieldnames-to-list

    This pair of changes is explained in some detail in info node
    "(edb)The database structure".  Migration from the former to the
    latter is encouraged but not enforced (for EDB 1.x).

  - Command ‘dbf-set-summary-format’ now allows editing of current value

  - Internal file format now uses ‘pp’

    This is still EDB "format 0.6" but now it is written using ‘pp’
    primarily for its escaping of newlines (i.e., written as "\n").
    Before, newlines in data fields were output verbatim.

    This should result in greater chance of identifying any data
    corruption occuring during transmission through varying
    eol-policy domains (email, through usloth machines, whatever).

  - Miscellaneous updates and bug fixes in ‘examples’ subdir

  - New reflection/testing in ‘skram’ subdir

    This is work-in-progress.  The idea is to use EDB to track
    changes to EDB.  Version control is one thing, design control is
    another...  Yes, EDB dares to venture into the dreaded land of
    Project Manglement!

    Actually, like all things to do w/ manglement, this demonstrates
    two aspects of EDB having to deal w/ trust: 1/ it is trustworthy
    enough to run scripts or participate in editing sessions where
    its current over-reaching of namespace is tolerable; and 2/ it
    requires manual verification, still, despite 1/.


- 1.22 | 2004-06-02

  This is a cleanup release (perhaps one of several) following
  maintainership transfer from Michael Ernst, the author of EDB,
  to Thien-Thi Nguyen, the slowly-searching student of EDB (and
  other works of codified thought).

  Cleanup means adding "./configure && make && make install"
  support (including commonly related things like "make dist",
  NEWS file, etc); minor upgrading of the elisp dialect and
  style; and bundling the examples.  A request for outstanding
  bugfixes posted to one of the newsgroups has gone unanswered
  to date, so this release includes no bugfixes.

  The programming interface has not changed.  Those elements
  mentioned in the info pages are guaranteed to NOT change for
  all 1.x versions of EDB.  If you have written an application
  based on EDB that uses undocumented elements, you can either
  contribute doc patches (which if accepted would result in
  those elements being guaranteed to NOT change), or prepare
  yourself for the necessity of rewriting that particular code
  if/when the undocumented elements change.


- 1.21 AND PRIOR

  Please refer to theory.lcs.mit.edu:/pub/emacs/edb/ for prior
  releases of EDB and related information.



Copyright information:

   Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim copies
   of this document as received, in any medium, provided that the
   copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved,
   thus giving the recipient permission to redistribute in turn.

   Permission is granted to distribute modified versions
   of this document, or of portions of it,
   under the above conditions, provided also that they
   carry prominent notices stating who last changed them.



	Local Variables:
	mode: outline
	outline-regexp: "\\([ ][ ]\\)*- "
	coding: utf-8
	fill-column: 72
	fill-prefix: "\t"
	End:
